ZHAW AI1 Module Blog Post

# Comment on AI as normal technology
The following blog post is documentation of what I learned from reading the article called “AI as normal technology”. The article presents the argument that AI is no more extraordinary than other technological innovations from the past such as electricity, the internet or social media. It criticises how AI adoption is measured and that the time it takes for diffusion and application to happen, are being underestimated. Understanding the trend of technology is not just a matter of being right or wrong, it's about finding the right policies to govern such technological innovations the right way and thus enabling application where useful.

Looking at technical innovation from a short run and long run perspective can be helpful because it is tempting to overestimate the impact of such innovation in the short run and underestimate the impact it will have in the long run.

## The short run
A very telling example the article provides is about machine learning and the methods being used. Despite the invention of new approaches for statistical models applications still rely on old and proven methods. This is because newer methods are more uncontrolled and yield unexpected results which are difficult to detect beforehand thus creating unwanted outcomes.
This example touches on the problem that we do not trust AI results. For example LLMs struggle to give factually correct results. While approaches like reflection have shown to improve results they are not reliable enough. Other approaches like Neural Symbol Systems try to capture knowledge within AI but these worlds seem notoriously difficult to combine. A paper from Apple which went viral this year called "The Illusion of Thinking" suggests that Large Reasoning Models fail to genuinely reason on complex tasks. In their experiments they noticed that the model does not come to new conclusions even if it has the computational resources to do so. This does seem to be a crucial problem which needs to be solved for broader application for tasks that are currently being performed by humans.

Current generative AI applications tend to market themselves as generalists, able to perform a variety of tasks, but actually the application of AI is very much industry dependent. Tasks which might seem related from a bird's eye view have different intricacies that make them difficult to solve. An example for this is collecting data. This might involve scanning and understanding documents to build a large database in one industry but might involve doing interviews with people for a different industry. It is tempting to think of a task as simple to automate from the outside, but the hidden details only come to light when inspected more thoroughly.

Because it is so difficult to see the concrete challenges we will be facing to jump over the next hurdles, one should be cautious in not overstating the technologies potential in the short run. It is only reasonable to assume that AI will currently only be an augmentation of human work rather than the replacement.

## The long run
Despite challenges which need solving in the short run, this does not mean that AI does not have huge potential that can be unfolded in the long run. While other technologies such as the internet have changed the way we work but took multiple decades to do so, the AI hype in LLMs has the special attributes that it is the first time technology has not just enabled better thinking but actually augmented the thinking process itself.
For example the internet made it possible to access knowledge in much larger quantities, from very diverse sources and with real time updates but in the end it had to be the humans piecing the information chunks together. Since language is an interface that comes to us naturally, LLMs can not only provide us information but rather augments our thought processes. This not only makes the technology accessible to many people but it also spans all industries and facets of life. Such technology which augments human thinking has the potential to accelerate its own development and this is something that we have not yet seen before in technologies.
Applying this technology will, as stated before, take time. But the potential realized in the future has the potential to put us on the trajectory to a new age.

To summarize I find it reasonable to argue that AI is normal technology. It seems to have a unique set of challenges in the short run and the hype around it is hiding the actual diffusion. But it bears huge potential in the long run. There is no point in fostering fear and calculating the probabilities of unlikely events but an opportunity to tackle many seemingly unsolvable problems.

